CHAPTER I. How Uther Pendragon sent for the duke of Cornwall and Igraine
his wife, and of their departing suddenly again.

IT befell in the days of Uther Pendragon, when he was king of all
England, and so reigned, that there was a mighty duke in Cornwall that
held war against him long time. And the duke was called the Duke of
Tintagil. And so by means King Uther sent for this duke, charging him to
bring his wife with him, for she was called a fair lady, and a passing
wise, and her name was called Igraine.

So when the duke and his wife were come unto the king, by the means of
great lords they were accorded both. The king liked and loved this lady
well, and he made them great cheer out of measure, and desired to have
lain by her. But she was a passing good woman, and would not assent unto
the king. And then she told the duke her husband, and said, I suppose
that we were sent for that I should be dishonoured; wherefore, husband,
I counsel you, that we depart from hence suddenly, that we may ride
all night unto our own castle. And in like wise as she said so they
departed, that neither the king nor none of his council were ware of
their departing. All so soon as King Uther knew of their departing
so suddenly, he was wonderly wroth. Then he called to him his privy
council, and told them of the sudden departing of the duke and his wife.


Then they advised the king to send for the duke and his wife by a great
charge; and if he will not come at your summons, then may ye do your
best, then have ye cause to make mighty war upon him. So that was done,
and the messengers had their answers; and that was this shortly, that
neither he nor his wife would not come at him.

Then was the king wonderly wroth. And then the king sent him plain word
again, and bade him be ready and stuff him and garnish him, for within
forty days he would fetch him out of the biggest castle that he hath.

When the duke had this warning, anon he went and furnished and garnished
two strong castles of his, of the which the one hight Tintagil, and
the other castle hight Terrabil. So his wife Dame Igraine he put in the
castle of Tintagil, and himself he put in the castle of Terrabil, the
which had many issues and posterns out. Then in all haste came Uther
with a great host, and laid a siege about the castle of Terrabil. And
there he pight many pavilions, and there was great war made on both
parties, and much people slain. Then for pure anger and for great love
of fair Igraine the king Uther fell sick. So came to the king Uther Sir
Ulfius, a noble knight, and asked the king why he was sick. I shall tell
thee, said the king, I am sick for anger and for love of fair Igraine,
that I may not be whole. Well, my lord, said Sir Ulfius, I shall seek
Merlin, and he shall do you remedy, that your heart shall be pleased. So
Ulfius departed, and by adventure he met Merlin in a beggar's array, and
there Merlin asked Ulfius whom he sought. And he said he had little
ado to tell him. Well, said Merlin, I know whom thou seekest, for thou
seekest Merlin; therefore seek no farther, for I am he; and if King
Uther will well reward me, and be sworn unto me to fulfil my desire,
that shall be his honour and profit more than mine; for I shall cause
him to have all his desire. All this will I undertake, said Ulfius, that
there shall be nothing reasonable but thou shalt have thy desire. Well,
said Merlin, he shall have his intent and desire. And therefore, said
Merlin, ride on your way, for I will not be long behind.




CHAPTER II. How Uther Pendragon made war on the duke of Cornwall, and
how by the mean of Merlin he lay by the duchess and gat Arthur.

THEN Ulfius was glad, and rode on more than a pace till that he came to
King Uther Pendragon, and told him he had met with Merlin. Where is he?
said the king. Sir, said Ulfius, he will not dwell long. Therewithal
Ulfius was ware where Merlin stood at the porch of the pavilion's door.
And then Merlin was bound to come to the king. When King Uther saw him,
he said he was welcome. Sir, said Merlin, I know all your heart every
deal; so ye will be sworn unto me as ye be a true king anointed, to
fulfil my desire, ye shall have your desire. Then the king was sworn
upon the Four Evangelists. Sir, said Merlin, this is my desire: the
first night that ye shall lie by Igraine ye shall get a child on her,
and when that is born, that it shall be delivered to me for to nourish
there as I will have it; for it shall be your worship, and the child's
avail, as mickle as the child is worth. I will well, said the king, as
thou wilt have it. Now make you ready, said Merlin, this night ye shall
lie with Igraine in the castle of Tintagil; and ye shall be like the
duke her husband, Ulfius shall be like Sir Brastias, a knight of the
duke's, and I will be like a knight that hight Sir Jordanus, a knight
of the duke's. But wait ye make not many questions with her nor her men,
but say ye are diseased, and so hie you to bed, and rise not on the morn
till I come to you, for the castle of Tintagil is but ten miles hence;
so this was done as they devised. But the duke of Tintagil espied how
the king rode from the siege of Terrabil, and therefore that night he
issued out of the castle at a postern for to have distressed the king's
host. And so, through his own issue, the duke himself was slain or ever
the king came at the castle of Tintagil.


So after the death of the duke, King Uther lay with Igraine more than
three hours after his death, and begat on her that night Arthur, and
on day came Merlin to the king, and bade him make him ready, and so he
kissed the lady Igraine and departed in all haste. But when the lady
heard tell of the duke her husband, and by all record he was dead or
ever King Uther came to her, then she marvelled who that might be that
lay with her in likeness of her lord; so she mourned privily and held
her peace. Then all the barons by one assent prayed the king of accord
betwixt the lady Igraine and him; the king gave them leave, for fain
would he have been accorded with her. So the king put all the trust in
Ulfius to entreat between them, so by the entreaty at the last the king
and she met together. Now will we do well, said Ulfius, our king is a
lusty knight and wifeless, and my lady Igraine is a passing fair lady;
it were great joy unto us all, an it might please the king to make her
his queen. Unto that they all well accorded and moved it to the king.
And anon, like a lusty knight, he assented thereto with good will, and
so in all haste they were married in a morning with great mirth and joy.

And King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney then wedded Margawse that was
Gawaine's mother, and King Nentres of the land of Garlot wedded Elaine.
All this was done at the request of King Uther. And the third sister
Morgan le Fay was put to school in a nunnery, and there she learned so
much that she was a great clerk of necromancy. And after she was
wedded to King Uriens of the land of Gore, that was Sir Ewain's le
Blanchemain's father.


CHAPTER III. Of the birth of King Arthur and of his nurture.

THEN Queen Igraine waxed daily greater and greater, so it befell after
within half a year, as King Uther lay by his queen, he asked her, by the
faith she owed to him, whose was the body; then she sore abashed to give
answer. Dismay you not, said the king, but tell me the truth, and I
shall love you the better, by the faith of my body. Sir, said she, I
shall tell you the truth. The same night that my lord was dead, the hour
of his death, as his knights record, there came into my castle of
Tintagil a man like my lord in speech and in countenance, and two
knights with him in likeness of his two knights Brastias and Jordanus,
and so I went unto bed with him as I ought to do with my lord, and the
same night, as I shall answer unto God, this child was begotten upon me.
That is truth, said the king, as ye say; for it was I myself that came
in the likeness, and therefore dismay you not, for I am father of the
child; and there he told her all the cause, how it was by Merlin's
counsel. Then the queen made great joy when she knew who was the father
of her child.

Soon came Merlin unto the king, and said, Sir, ye must purvey you for
the nourishing of your child. As thou wilt, said the king, be it. Well,
said Merlin, I know a lord of yours in this land, that is a passing true
man and a faithful, and he shall have the nourishing of your child, and
his name is Sir Ector, and he is a lord of fair livelihood in many parts
in England and Wales; and this lord, Sir Ector, let him be sent for, for
to come and speak with you, and desire him yourself, as he loveth you,
that he will put his own child to nourishing to another woman, and that
his wife nourish yours. And when the child is born let it be delivered
to me at yonder privy postern unchristened. So like as Merlin devised it
was done. And when Sir Ector was come he made fiaunce to the king for to
nourish the child like as the king desired; and there the king granted
Sir Ector great rewards. Then when the lady was delivered, the king
commanded two knights and two ladies to take the child, bound in a cloth
of gold, and that ye deliver him to what poor man ye meet at the postern
gate of the castle. So the child was delivered unto Merlin, and so he
bare it forth unto Sir Ector, and made an holy man to christen him, and
named him Arthur; and so Sir Ector's wife nourished him with her own
pap.



CHAPTER IV. Of the death of King Uther Pendragon.

THEN within two years King Uther fell sick of a great malady. And in the
meanwhile his enemies usurped upon him, and did a great battle upon his
men, and slew many of his people. Sir, said Merlin, ye may not lie so as
ye do, for ye must to the field though ye ride on an horse-litter: for
ye shall never have the better of your enemies but if your person be
there, and then shall ye have the victory. So it was done as Merlin had
devised, and they carried the king forth in an horse-litter with a great
host towards his enemies. And at St. Albans there met with the king a
great host of the North. And that day Sir Ulfius and Sir Brastias did
great deeds of arms, and King Uther's men overcame the Northern battle
and slew many people, and put the remnant to flight. And then the king
returned unto London, and made great joy of his victory. And then he
fell passing sore sick, so that three days and three nights he was
speechless: wherefore all the barons made great sorrow, and asked Merlin
what counsel were best. There is none other remedy, said Merlin, but God
will have his will. But look ye all barons be before King Uther to-morn,
and God and I shall make him to speak. So on the morn all the barons
with Merlin came to-fore the king; then Merlin said aloud unto King
Uther, Sir, shall your son Arthur be king after your days, of this realm
with all the appurtenance? Then Uther Pendragon turned him, and said
in hearing of them all, I give him God's blessing and mine, and bid him
pray for my soul, and righteously and worshipfully that he claim the
crown, upon forfeiture of my blessing; and therewith he yielded up
the ghost, and then was he interred as longed to a king. Wherefore the
queen, fair Igraine, made great sorrow, and all the barons.




CHAPTER V. How Arthur was chosen king, and of wonders and marvels of a
sword taken out of a stone by the said Arthur.

THEN stood the realm in great jeopardy long while, for every lord that
was mighty of men made him strong, and many weened to have been king.
Then Merlin went to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and counselled him for
to send for all the lords of the realm, and all the gentlemen of arms,
that they should to London come by Christmas, upon pain of cursing; and
for this cause, that Jesus, that was born on that night, that he would
of his great mercy show some miracle, as he was come to be king of
mankind, for to show some miracle who should be rightwise king of this
realm. So the Archbishop, by the advice of Merlin, sent for all the
lords and gentlemen of arms that they should come by Christmas even
unto London. And many of them made them clean of their life, that their
prayer might be the more acceptable unto God. So in the greatest church
of London, whether it were Paul's or not the French book maketh no
mention, all the estates were long or day in the church for to pray.
And when matins and the first mass was done, there was seen in the
churchyard, against the high altar, a great stone four square, like unto
a marble stone; and in midst thereof was like an anvil of steel a foot
on high, and therein stuck a fair sword naked by the point, and letters
there were written in gold about the sword that said thus:--Whoso
pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king
born of all England. Then the people marvelled, and told it to the
Archbishop. I command, said the Archbishop, that ye keep you within your
church and pray unto God still, that no man touch the sword till the
high mass be all done. So when all masses were done all the lords went
to behold the stone and the sword. And when they saw the scripture some
assayed, such as would have been king. But none might stir the sword
nor move it. He is not here, said the Archbishop, that shall achieve the
sword, but doubt not God will make him known. But this is my counsel,
said the Archbishop, that we let purvey ten knights, men of good fame,
and they to keep this sword. So it was ordained, and then there was made
a cry, that every man should assay that would, for to win the sword. And
upon New Year's Day the barons let make a jousts and a tournament, that
all knights that would joust or tourney there might play, and all this
was ordained for to keep the lords together and the commons, for the
Archbishop trusted that God would make him known that should win the
sword.

So upon New Year's Day, when the service was done, the barons rode unto
the field, some to joust and some to tourney, and so it happened that
Sir Ector, that had great livelihood about London, rode unto the
jousts, and with him rode Sir Kay his son, and young Arthur that was his
nourished brother; and Sir Kay was made knight at All Hallowmass afore.
So as they rode to the jousts-ward, Sir Kay lost his sword, for he had
left it at his father's lodging, and so he prayed young Arthur for to
ride for his sword. I will well, said Arthur, and rode fast after the
sword, and when he came home, the lady and all were out to see the
jousting. Then was Arthur wroth, and said to himself, I will ride to the
churchyard, and take the sword with me that sticketh in the stone, for
my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day. So when he
came to the churchyard, Sir Arthur alighted and tied his horse to the
stile, and so he went to the tent, and found no knights there, for they
were at the jousting. And so he handled the sword by the handles, and
lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the stone, and took his horse and
rode his way until he came to his brother Sir Kay, and delivered him
the sword. And as soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he wist well it was the
sword of the stone, and so he rode to his father Sir Ector, and said:
Sir, lo here is the sword of the stone, wherefore I must be king of this
land. When Sir Ector beheld the sword, he returned again and came to the
church, and there they alighted all three, and went into the church. And
anon he made Sir Kay swear upon a book how he came to that sword. Sir,
said Sir Kay, by my brother Arthur, for he brought it to me. How gat ye
this sword? said Sir Ector to Arthur. Sir, I will tell you. When I came
home for my brother's sword, I found nobody at home to deliver me his
sword; and so I thought my brother Sir Kay should not be swordless, and
so I came hither eagerly and pulled it out of the stone without any
pain. Found ye any knights about this sword? said Sir Ector. Nay, said
Arthur. Now, said Sir Ector to Arthur, I understand ye must be king of
this land. Wherefore I, said Arthur, and for what cause? Sir, said
Ector, for God will have it so; for there should never man have drawn
out this sword, but he that shall be rightwise king of this land. Now
let me see whether ye can put the sword there as it was, and pull it out
again. That is no mastery, said Arthur, and so he put it in the stone;
wherewithal Sir Ector assayed to pull out the sword and failed.


CHAPTER VI. How King Arthur pulled out the sword divers times.

Now assay, said Sir Ector unto Sir Kay. And anon he pulled at the sword
with all his might; but it would not be. Now shall ye assay, said Sir
Ector to Arthur. I will well, said Arthur, and pulled it out easily. And
therewithal Sir Ector knelt down to the earth, and Sir Kay. Alas, said
Arthur, my own dear father and brother, why kneel ye to me? Nay, nay,
my lord Arthur, it is not so; I was never your father nor of your blood,
but I wot well ye are of an higher blood than I weened ye were. And then
Sir Ector told him all, how he was betaken him for to nourish him, and
by whose commandment, and by Merlin's deliverance.


Then Arthur made great dole when he understood that Sir Ector was not
his father. Sir, said Ector unto Arthur, will ye be my good and gracious
lord when ye are king? Else were I to blame, said Arthur, for ye are the
man in the world that I am most beholden to, and my good lady and mother
your wife, that as well as her own hath fostered me and kept. And if
ever it be God's will that I be king as ye say, ye shall desire of me
what I may do, and I shall not fail you; God forbid I should fail you
Sir, said Sir Ector, I will ask no more of you, but that ye will make
my son, your foster brother, Sir Kay, seneschal of all your lands. That
shall be done, said Arthur, and more, by the faith of my body, that
never man shall have that office but he, while he and I live Therewithal
they went unto the Archbishop, and told him how the sword was achieved,
and by whom; and on Twelfth-day all the barons came thither, and to
assay to take the sword, who that would assay. But there afore them all,
there might none take it out but Arthur; wherefore there were many lords
wroth, and said it was great shame unto them all and the realm, to be
overgoverned with a boy of no high blood born. And so they fell out at
that time that it was put off till Candlemas and then all the barons
should meet there again; but always the ten knights were ordained to
watch the sword day and night, and so they set a pavilion over the stone
and the sword, and five always watched. So at Candlemas many more great
lords came thither for to have won the sword, but there might none
prevail. And right as Arthur did at Christmas, he did at Candlemas, and
pulled out the sword easily, whereof the barons were sore aggrieved and
put it off in delay till the high feast of Easter. And as Arthur sped
before, so did he at Easter; yet there were some of the great lords had
indignation that Arthur should be king, and put it off in a delay till
the feast of Pentecost.

Then the Archbishop of Canterbury by Merlin's providence let purvey
then of the best knights that they might get, and such knights as Uther
Pendragon loved best and most trusted in his days. And such knights were
put about Arthur as Sir Baudwin of Britain, Sir Kay, Sir Ulfius, Sir
Brastias. All these, with many other, were always about Arthur, day and
night, till the feast of Pentecost.



CHAPTER VII. How King Arthur was crowned, and how he made officers.

AND at the feast of Pentecost all manner of men assayed to pull at the
sword that would assay; but none might prevail but Arthur, and pulled it
out afore all the lords and commons that were there, wherefore all the
commons cried at once, We will have Arthur unto our king, we will put
him no more in delay, for we all see that it is God's will that he shall
be our king, and who that holdeth against it, we will slay him. And
therewithal they kneeled at once, both rich and poor, and cried Arthur
mercy because they had delayed him so long, and Arthur forgave them,
and took the sword between both his hands, and offered it upon the altar
where the Archbishop was, and so was he made knight of the best man that
was there. And so anon was the coronation made. And there was he sworn
unto his lords and the commons for to be a true king, to stand with true
justice from thenceforth the days of this life. Also then he made all
lords that held of the crown to come in, and to do service as they ought
to do. And many complaints were made unto Sir Arthur of great wrongs
that were done since the death of King Uther, of many lands that were
bereaved lords, knights, ladies, and gentlemen. Wherefore King Arthur
made the lands to be given again unto them that owned them.

When this was done, that the king had stablished all the countries about
London, then he let make Sir Kay seneschal of England; and Sir Baudwin
of Britain was made constable; and Sir Ulfius was made chamberlain; and
Sir Brastias was made warden to wait upon the north from Trent forwards,
for it was that time the most party the king's enemies. But within few
years after Arthur won all the north, Scotland, and all that were under
their obeissance. Also Wales, a part of it, held against Arthur, but he
overcame them all, as he did the remnant, through the noble prowess of
himself and his knights of the Round Table.



CHAPTER VIII. How King Arthur held in Wales, at a Pentecost, a great
feast, and what kings and lords came to his feast.

THEN the king removed into Wales, and let cry a great feast that it
should be holden at Pentecost after the incoronation of him at the city
of Carlion. Unto the feast came King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney, with
five hundred knights with him. Also there came to the feast King Uriens
of Gore with four hundred knights with him. Also there came to that
feast King Nentres of Garlot, with seven hundred knights with him. Also
there came to the feast the king of Scotland with six hundred knights
with him, and he was but a young man. Also there came to the feast a
king that was called the King with the Hundred Knights, but he and his
men were passing well beseen at all points. Also there came the king
of Carados with five hundred knights. And King Arthur was glad of their
coming, for he weened that all the kings and knights had come for great
love, and to have done him worship at his feast; wherefore the king made
great joy, and sent the kings and knights great presents. But the kings
would none receive, but rebuked the messengers shamefully, and said they
had no joy to receive no gifts of a beardless boy that was come of low
blood, and sent him word they would none of his gifts, but that they
were come to give him gifts with hard swords betwixt the neck and
the shoulders: and therefore they came thither, so they told to the
messengers plainly, for it was great shame to all them to see such a boy
to have a rule of so noble a realm as this land was. With this answer
the messengers departed and told to King Arthur this answer. Wherefore,
by the advice of his barons, he took him to a strong tower with five
hundred good men with him. And all the kings aforesaid in a manner laid
a siege to-fore him, but King Arthur was well victualed. And within
fifteen days there came Merlin among them into the city of Carlion. Then
all the kings were passing glad of Merlin, and asked him, For what cause
is that boy Arthur made your king? Sirs, said Merlin, I shall tell you
the cause, for he is King Uther Pendragon's son, born in wedlock, gotten
on Igraine, the duke's wife of Tintagil. Then is he a bastard, they said
all. Nay, said Merlin, after the death of the duke, more than three
hours, was Arthur begotten, and thirteen days after King Uther wedded
Igraine; and therefore I prove him he is no bastard. And who saith nay,
he shall be king and overcome all his enemies; and, or he die, he shall
be long king of all England, and have under his obeissance Wales,
Ireland, and Scotland, and more realms than I will now rehearse. Some of
the kings had marvel of Merlin's words, and deemed well that it should
be as he said; and some of them laughed him to scorn, as King Lot; and
more other called him a witch. But then were they accorded with Merlin,
that King Arthur should come out and speak with the kings, and to come
safe and to go safe, such surance there was made. So Merlin went unto
King Arthur, and told him how he had done, and bade him fear not, but
come out boldly and speak with them, and spare them not, but answer them
as their king and chieftain; for ye shall overcome them all, whether
they will or nill.
